David Balfour is a young man of seventeen years of age. David was born and raised in the Lowlands of Scotland, David's father has just died at the beginning of the story, leaving him an orphan.
Alan Breck Stewart is a flamboyant but skilled warrior from the Scottish Highlands. Alan is a Jacobite rebel, and he is fiercely loyal to his clan and countrymen. He is an excellent swordsman and marksman, but he is also a braggart.
Ebenezer Balfour is the scheming, miserly uncle of David Balfour. Ebenezer plots to have David killed or taken away so that he can have complete control of the Balfour fortunes.
Captain Hoseason is the captain of the shipCovenant.Hoseason abducts David onto his ship on the orders of David's uncle Ebenezer, and later tries to kill David and Alan Breck Stewart. He is shipwrecked after theCovenantfounders on the Torran Rocks.
Mr. Campbell is the kindly Protestant preacher who takes care of David after the death of his father.
Mr. Rankeillor is David Balfour's lawyer. Mr. Rankeillor helps David against his scheming uncle Ebenezer near the end of the novel.
Colin Campbell of Glenure is the King's Factor, or agent, in the Highlands. Unlike most of the Highland clans, the Campbells are not Jacobites, and are loyal to England. Colin Campbell is plotting to evict all the Jacobite Stewarts from their homes when he is murdered.
James of the Glens is the leader of the Stewart clan (the clan of Alan Breck). Like most Highland chieftains, James has been stripped of his powers by the English government. When Colin Campbell is murdered, James is quickly accused of having been involved.
Cluny Macpherson is Like James of the Glens, Cluny is a former chieftain stripped of his powers by the English government. Marked for death by the English after leading Jacobite troops against the English army, Cluny now hides in a treehouse near the mountain of Ben Alder.
Henderland is an old catechist (religious instructor) who befriends David as he walks through the Highlands.
Alexander Balfour is David's father. Once, Alexander and his brother Ebenezer had a fight over a woman (David's future mother). Alexander was the elder brother, but he made a deal: he married David's mother, and Ebenezer kept the House of Shaws, their estate. Alexander has died by the beginning ofKidnapped.
Robin Oig is a son of the famous Scottish nationalist Rob Roy Macgregor. Robin is also a foe of Alan Breck, since Rob Roy was a Campbell.
Riach is the second officer of theCovenant.He is kinder to David than the other soldiers, and helps Alan escape after the ship wrecks on the Torran Rocks.
Ransome is the cabin boy of theCovenant.Ransome is younger than David Balfour, but has led a tough life at sea. He considers himself a tough sailor, but Mr. Shuan often beats him.
Mr. Shuan is the first officer of theCovenant.Shuan is monstrous when drinking, and actually kills the cabin boy, Ransome, in a drunken rage. He is later himself killed by Alan Breck Stewart in the battle of the Round-House.