Sal Paradise is the narrator, a young writer.
Dean Moriarty is the hero, a reckless, energetic, womanizing young man from Colorado who has been in and out of jail.
Carlo Marx is a good friend of Sal and Dean's, a brooding poet who is sensual and energetic.
Marylou is Dean's first wife, a pretty "dumb" blonde from Colorado.
Ed Dunkel is a tall, affable friend of Sal and Dean's. Not too bright, he'll do anything Dean says.
Galatea Dunkel is Ed Dunkel's serious, disapproving newlywed wife.
Remi Boncoeur is an old friend of Sal's from prep school. Remi, a flamboyant Frenchman, is a petty thief and gambler, constantly in debt but extravagant and sometimes gallant and generous.
Lee Ann is Remi Boncoeur's sulky girlfriend.
Sal's aunt is She is tolerant, supportive, and kind. Sal lives at her house in Paterson, New Jersey, and Long Island. Throughout Sal's wanderings, she sends him money.
Chad King is Sal's friend from Denver; young, slim, blond and soft-spoken. He is interested in philosophy, anthropology, and pre-historic Indians.
Tim Gray is a friend of Sal's in Denver.
Roland Major is a friend with whom Sal lives briefly in Denver. Major is a Hemingway-esque writer who is scornful of "arty" types but snobby himself, often talking to Sal about Europe and fine wines.
Camille is Dean's second wife, for whom he divorces Marylou. Loyal Camille lives in San Francisco with her and Dean's children.
The Rawlinses is Ray and Babe, brother and sister, Denver friends of Sal's group. Babe, "an enterprising blonde," is Tim Gray's girlfriend.
Rita Bettencourt is a waitress in Denver whom Dean sets up with Sal. According to Dean, she has a "sex problem." Sal tries to prove to her that sex is beautiful, but he fails to impress her.
Old Bull Lee is "Long, lean, strange and laconic," a long-time friend of Sal and Carlo, the teacher of their group. A traveler, writer, and junkie.
Elmer Hassel is a lost friend whom Sal and Dean seek everywhere they go.
Jane Lee is Bull Lee's sarcastic wife, a benzedrine junkie.
Lucille is a married woman in New York whom Sal wants to marry for awhile.
Denver D. Doll is a Central City friend, whom Sal sees all over town. Eager Denver D. Doll shakes hands and makes sometimes-incoherent pleasantries ("Good afternoon" at midnight, "Happy New Year," etc.)--from morning to night, a caricature of an official.
Terry is a pretty Mexican girl with whom Sal spends fifteen days in California. She comes from a family of grape-pickers in Sabinal, has a son, and is trying to escape a husband who beat her.
Rickey is Terry's wild, drunk, happy-go-lucky brother whom Sal meets in Sabinal.
Ponzo is Terry and Rickey's friend, a manure-seller who smells like it. Big and eager to please, Ponzo is in love with Terry.
Johnny is Terry's seven-year-old son.
Hingham is Sal's friend in Tucson, Arizona; a shy writer who lives with his wife, baby, and mother.
Slim Gaillard is a friend of Dean's in San Francisco, Slim goes to jazz joints and adds the suffix "orooni" to everything he says.
Roy Johnson is a friend of Sal's who chauffeurs Dean and Sal in San Francisco..
Inez is Dean's third wife, a sexy brunette he meets in New York.
Stan Shephard is an enthusiastic friend of Tim Gray's who goes to Mexico with Dean and Sal. Stan has a controlling grandfather he is trying to escape.
Victor is the kind, polite Mexican man; Sal, Dean, and Stan's guide in Gregoria.