Jason Compson III is the head of the Compson household until his death from alcoholism in1912. Mr. Compson is the father of Quentin, Caddy, Jason IV, and Benjy, and the husband of Caroline.
Caroline Compson is the self-pitying and self-absorbed wife of  Mr. Compson and mother of the four Compson children. Caroline’s hypochondria preoccupies her and contributes to her inability to care properly for her children.
Quentin Compson is the oldest of the Compson children and the narrator of the novel’s second chapter. A sensitive and intelligent boy, Quentin is preoccupied with his love for his sister Caddy and his notion of the Compson family’s honor. He commits suicide by drowning himself just before the end of his first year at Harvard.
Caddy Compson is the second oldest of the Compson children and the only daughter. Actually named Candace, Caddy is very close to her brother Quentin. She becomes promiscuous, gets pregnant out of wedlock, and eventually marries and divorces Herbert Head in1910.
Jason Compson IV is the second youngest of the Compson children and the narrator of the novel’s third chapter. Jason is mean-spirited, petty, and very cynical.
Benjy Compson is the youngest of the Compson children  and narrator of the novel’s first chapter. Born  Maury Compson, his name is changed to Benjamin  in1900, when he is discovered to be severely mentally retarded.
Miss Quentin is Caddy’s illegitimate daughter, who is raised by the Compsons after Caddy’s divorce. A rebellious, promiscuous, and miserably unhappy girl, Miss Quentin eventually steals money from Jason and leaves town with a member of a traveling minstrel show.
The Compsons’ “Negro” cook, Dilsey is a pious, strong-willed, protective woman who serves as a stabilizing force for the Compson family.
Roskus is Dilsey’s husband and the Compsons’ servant. Roskus suffers from a severe case of rheumatism that eventually kills him.
T.P. is One of Dilsey’s sons, T.P. gets drunk with Benjy and fights with Quentin at Caddy’s wedding.
Versh is Another of Dilsey’s sons and Benjy’s keepers.
Frony is Dilsey’s daughter. Frony is also Luster’s mother and works in the Compsons’ kitchen.
Luster is Frony’s son and Dilsey’s grandson. Luster is a young boy who looks after and entertains Benjy in1928, despite the fact that he is only half Benjy’s age.
The man with the red tie is the mysterious man with whom Miss Quentin allegedly elopes.
Damuddy is the Compson children’s grandmother, who dies when they are young.
Uncle Maury Bascomb is Mrs. Compson’s brother, who lives off his brother-in-law’s money. Benjy is initially named after Uncle Maury, but Benjy’s condition and Caroline’s insecurity about her family name convince her to change her son’s name.
Mr. and Mrs. Patterson is the Compsons’ next-door neighbors. Uncle Maury has an affair with Mrs. Patterson until Mr. Patterson intercepts a note Maury has sent to her.
Charlie is One of Caddy’s first suitors, whom Benjy catches with Caddy on the swing during the first chapter.
Dalton Ames is a local Jefferson boy who is probably the father of Caddy’s child, Miss Quentin.
Shreve MacKenzie is Quentin’s roommate at Harvard. A young Canadian man, Shreve reappears inAbsalom, Absalom!,one of Faulkner’s later novels, which is largely narrated by Shreve and Quentin from their dorm room at Harvard.
Spoade is a Harvard senior from South Carolina. Spoade once mocked Quentin’s virginity by calling Shreve  Quentin’s “husband.”
Gerald Bland is a swaggering student at Harvard. Quentin fights with Gerald because he reminds him of Dalton Ames.
Mrs. Bland is Gerald Bland’s boastful, Southern mother.
Deacon is a black man in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to whom Quentin gives his suicide notes.
Julio is the brother of an Italian girl who attaches herself to Quentin as he wanders Cambridge before his suicide.
Sydney Herbert Head is the prosperous banker whom Caddy marries. Herbert later divorces Caddy because of  her pregnancy.
Lorraine is Jason’s mistress, a prostitute who lives in Memphis.
Earl is the owner of the farm-supply store where Jason works. Earl feels some loyalty toward Mrs. Compson and thus puts up with Jason’s surliness.
Uncle Job is a black man who works with Jason at Earl’s store.
Reverend Shegog is the pastor who delivers a powerful sermon on Easter Sunday at the local black church in Jefferson.