Harry Potter is the hero and protagonist, Harry is a twelve-year-old boy with messy hair and glasses who became famous within the wizard community by surviving the curse of a powerful wizard. Harry frequently finds himself entangled in dangerous adventures but he always lives to tell the tale. Harry's character represents good intentions, innocence, and the fantasies of childhood.
Ron Weasley is Ron is tall, red-haired, and from a respected but poor family. Ron is one of Harry's two best friends at Hogwarts. He is loyal to Harry, and belligerent to their enemy, Malfoy. Ron uses experience and a process of trial-and-error to solve most mysteries. Ron's character is often overshadowed by Harry's, but Ron always manages to succeed.
Hermione Granger is Hermione is always the top student in her class. She is clever and well-read. Most spells come easily to her and remain in her encyclopedic mind.. However, she is in principle a rule-follower, and so in this story she often alienates Harry and Ron by reporting or threatening to report them to Professor McGonagall, in cases such as Harry's gift of the Firebolt, or his possession and use of the Marauder's map.
Once a student who attended Hogwarts fifty years prior to Harry's time, Voldemort molded himself into the most powerful dark wizard the world has ever seen. Twelve years before, he killed Harry's parents and tried to kill Harry, only to have his curse backfire and render him powerless. It is generally believed that Sirius Black turned Harry's parents over to Voldemort, although in truth, Peter Pettigrew is guilty.
Remus Lupin is Lupin is the new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher, and he is very competent and likeable. He teaches Harry how to defend himself against Dementors, but he is forced to leave Hogwarts at the end of the year on account of his being a werewolf. He is one of the creators of the Marauder's Map.
Sirius Black is Once James Potter's best friend, now an escaped convict from the wizard prison Azkaban, Black is suspected to be the cause of twelve Muggle deaths as well as the indirect cause of the deaths of Harry's parents. He is a threat on the frontier of this story, one of the premier good wizards turned bad, although in the end he is revealed to be innocent in addition to being Harry's godfather. Also, Black is able to transform himself at will into Padfoot, a large black dog that Harry mistakes for the Grim. One of the creators of the Marauder's Map.
The gamekeeper at Hogwarts and a good friend of Harry's, Hagrid is a giant, hairy man with an inimitable accent, and he has a great liking for strange and dangerous creatures. In this book, he is the defender of Buckbeak, a hippogriff that is placed on trial for injuring Draco Malfoy.
Peter Pettigrew is the fourth in the group of friends that included James Potter, Sirius Black, and Remus Lupin, Pettigrew betrayed Lily and James, turning their whereabouts over the Voldemort, then blowing up a dozen Muggles, framing Black and turning himself into a rat so that he could escape. Another of the creators of the Marauder's Map. Disguised as Scabbers, he has lived many years as Ron's pet rat.
Albus Dumbledore is Dumbledore, the headmaster of Hogwarts, is a wise, powerful, elderly man with a long silver beard, and he is one of the most impressive characters Harry has ever met. He has a calm, secretive demeanor and is extremely intuitive, tolerant, and trustworthy.
Sibyll Trelawney is the Divination Professor; an insect-like, rather dramatic women who loves predicting deaths but is not at all accurate in her predictions.
Minerva McGonagall is the head of Gryffindor House, a stern but deeply concerned witch, and a great aficionado of Quidditch.
Severus Snape is the Potions teacher, and a slimy, ill-tempered man, Snape is the head of Slytherin House and gets great pleasure out of trying to get Harry into trouble.
Professor Flitwick is a small, kind professor who teaches Charms.
Draco Malfoy is a slimy, smirking, and snotty boy from Slytherin House, Malfoy is Harry's greatest Hogwarts nemesis (not counting Voldemort, who usually resides outside Hogwarts). Because his family is very wealthy and influential, Malfoy is able to use his father's power as an intimidation tactic, in this book when he tries to have Hagrid fired and Buckbeak executed.
Lucius Malfoy is Draco Malfoy's father, a mean, powerful man whose name and money his son, Draco, uses to get his way.
Ginny Weasley is Ron's younger sister, and a sweet and shy red-haired girl with an enormous crush on Harry.
Percy Weasley is Ron's oldest brother still at Hogwarts, a prefect, and a somewhat pompous figure, with, in the end, good intentions.
Fred Weasley is One of Ron's older brothers, Fred is a beater for the Gryffindor House Quidditch team, and a good solid troublemaker when paired with his twin brother, George. Fred has the slightly louder, more over-the-top sense of humor of the two, but they are identical and usually inseparable. He and his brother George are responsible for passing the Marauder's Map onto Harry.
George Weasley is One of Ron's older brothers, George is a beater for the Gryffindor House Quidditch team, and a good solid troublemaker when paired with his twin brother, Fred. He is somewhat subtler and more tongue-in-cheek than his twin, but otherwise, for the most part identical. Together, the Weasley twins are an infamous, amusing, and charming pair.
Molly Weasley is Ron's mother; she is very maternal and protective, but also quite strict.
Arthur Weasley is Ron's father, who works in the Misuse of Muggles Artifacts Office within the Ministry of Magic. He loves any sort of Muggle things with a buoyant, childlike enthusiasm. A thoroughly likeable man, Mr. Weasley treats Harry as if he were one of his own (many) children.
Vernon Dursley is Harry's stuffy, overweight, and nasty-tempered Muggle uncle.
Petunia Dursley is Harry's stuffy, underweight, and nasty-tempered Muggle aunt.
Dudley Dursley is Harry's spoiled, overweight, and nasty-tempered Muggle cousin.
Aunt Marge is Vernon Dursley's visiting sister; a loud, beefy, nasty-tempered Muggle woman who adores attack dogs and enjoys insulting Harry and his late parents.
Lily Potter is Harry's mother who sacrificed herself to save Harry from Voldemort; Harry can hear her screams when Dementors are near.
James Potter is Harry's father, also killed by Voldemort; his animagi stag becomes the shape of Harry's patronus. One of the creators of the Marauder's Map.
Stan Shunpike is the teenaged, pimply, nosy conductor of the Knight Bus.
Ernie Prang is the driver of the Knight Bus.
Argus Filch is the Hogwarts caretaker, who is grouchy and adores nothing but his cat.
Mrs. Norris is Filch's beloved cat.
Cornelius Fudge is the rather eccentrically dressed Minister of Magic, very involved in the protection of Harry and Hogwarts against Sirius Black.
Oliver Wood is the Gryffindor Quidditch captain and keeper.
Cedric Diggory is the handsome Hufflepuff seeker; catches the Snitch when Harry falls from his broom.
Cho Chang is the pretty fourth-year Ravenclaw seeker; Harry beats her to the Snitch.
Neville Longbottom is a sweet, pudgy, and very clumsy Gryffindor boy; leaves the passwords on a scrap of paper in the corridors, thus allowing Sirius Black to enter Gryffindor Tower.
Goyle is One of Draco Malfoy's unintelligent, lumbering cronies.
Crabbe is the other of Draco Malfoy's unintelligent, lumbering cronies.
Penelope Clearwater is a Ravenclaw prefect and Percy's girlfriend.
Madam Rosmerta is the barmaid at the Three Broomsticks in Hogsmeade.
Nearly-Headless Nick is a friendly Gryffindor ghost.
Peeves is a poltergeist who causes lots of harmless trouble at Hogwarts.
One of Hagrid's beloved hippogriffs, Buckbeak attacks Malfoy and is sentenced to death, only to be saved by Harry and Hermione when they turn time back.
Hedwig is Harry's pet owl.
Scabbers is Ron's aging rat; the animal form of Peter Pettigrew.
Crookshanks is Hermione's aggressive ginger cat.
Padfoot is Sirius Black's animagi name, when he is a large black dog.
Prongs is James Potter's animagi name, when he is a stag.
Moony is Remus Lupin's werewolf name.
Wormtail is Peter Pettigrew's animagi name, when he is a rat.