Alexei Fyodorovich Karamazov is (Alyosha,Alyoshka, Alyoshenka, Alyoshechka, Alxeichick, Lyosha, Lyoshenka) The protagonist, the third son of Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov, and the younger brother of Dmitri and Ivan. Kind, gentle, loving, and wise, Alyosha is the opposite of his coarse and vulgar father. He possesses a natural, simple faith in God that translates into a genuine love for mankind. Around twenty years old at the start of the novel, Alyosha is affiliated with the monastery, where he is a student of the elder Zosima.
Dmitri Fyodorovich Karamazov is (Mitka,Mitya, Mitenka, Mitri Fyodorovich) The oldest son of Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov. Dmitri is passionate and intemperate, easily swept away by emotions and enthusiasms, as he demonstrates when he loses interest in his fiancée Katerina and falls madly in love with Grushenka. Cursed with a violent temper, Dmitri is plagued with the burden of sin and struggles throughout the novel to overcome his own flawed nature and to attain spiritual redemption.
Ivan Fyodorovich Karamazov is (Vanya, Vanka, Vanechka) The second son of Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov, and the middle brother between Dmitri and Alyosha. A brilliant student, Ivan has an acutely logical mind and demands a rational explanation for everything that happens in the universe. As a result of his inability to reconcile the idea of unjust suffering with the idea of a loving God, Ivan is plagued by religious doubt, and he oscillates between outright atheism and belief in a malevolent God. His forceful arguments about God’s cruelty toward mankind are compelling, but after they lead to the murder of his father, they drive him into madness.
Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov is the wealthy patriarch of the Karamazov dynasty, the father of Alyosha, Dmitri, and Ivan, and almost certainly the father of Smerdyakov. Coarse, vulgar, greedy, and lustful, Fyodor Pavlovich lives a life devoted exclusively to the satisfaction of his senses, with no thought for those whom he betrays or hurts. Completely lacking in dignity despite his wealth, Fyodor Pavlovich is loathed by almost everyone who knows him. He has no affection for his children, and even forgets which of them belongs to which mother. His only goal in life is to have money and seduce young women such as Grushenka, whom he lusts after for much of the novel. Fyodor Pavlovich is eventually murdered by Smerdyakov.
Agrafena Alexandrovna Svetlov is (Grushenka,Grusha, Grushka) A beautiful young woman who is brought to the town by Samsonov after a lover betrays her. Proud, fiery, and headstrong, Grushenka is an almost universal object of desire among the men in the town and is the source of much of the antagonism between Fyodor Pavlovich and Dmitri. She is reputed to be sexually promiscuous, but in reality, she is much too proud to give herself to lovers. She devotes herself instead to increasing her wealth by making shrewd investments, but after she meets Alyosha, a hidden vein of gentleness and love begins to emerge in her character.
Pavel Fyodorovich Smerdyakov is the son of Lizaveta and Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov, Smerdyakov is raised by Grigory and his wife Marfa and is made to work in Fyodor Pavlovich’s house as a servant. Cursed with epilepsy, Smerdyakov also has a mean temperament, sometimes exhibiting outright malice and sometimes hiding behind a mask of groveling servitude. He is particularly interested in discussing philosophy with Ivan, whose advocacy of an antireligious amorality paves the way for Smerdyakov to murder Fyodor Pavlovich.
Zosima is the wise elder at the monastery who acts as Alyosha’s mentor and teacher before his death in Book VI. Extremely intelligent and filled with an ardent and sincere religious faith, Zosima preaches a message of actively loving mankind, forgiving the sins of others, and cherishing God’s creation. The clarity of Zosima’s faith gives him extraordinary insight into the minds of the people he meets.
Katerina Ivanovna Verkhovtsev is (Katya,Katka, Katenka) Dmitri’s fiancée, whom he abandons after falling in love with Grushenka. The proud and sensitive daughter of a military captain, Katerina anguishes over her ill treatment by Dmitri, which leads her to adopt an attitude of martyrdom toward those around her. She insists on humiliating herself with an unfailing loyalty to the people who hurt her, and though she loves Ivan, she is unable to act on her love until the end of the novel.
Katerina Ospovna Khokhlakov is (Madame Khokhlakov) A wealthy gentlewoman in the town, an acquaintance of the Karamazovs and a friend of Katerina. A relatively harmless presence, she is somewhat shallow and self-centered, and tends to obsess over the misbehaviors of her daughter Lise.
Liza Khokhlakov is (Lise) Madame Khokhlakov’s daughter, a mischievous and capricious young girl who is briefly engaged to Alyosha. At least as shallow and self-centered as her mother, Lise has a hard time taking things seriously and finally lapses into a kind of self-destructive despair, in which she pathetically crushes her fingernail in a door in an attempt to punish herself for wickedness.
Mikhail Osipovich Rakitin is a young seminary student whom Alyosha considers a friend, but who secretly despises him. Cynical and sarcastic, Rakitin is too sophisticated to have real religious faith, so he satisfies himself with adopting various fashionable philosophical theories. He quotes Nietzsche and claims to be a socialist. Deeply threatened by Alyosha’s apparently genuine moral purity, Rakitin secretly longs to see Alyosha become corrupted. As a result, he tries very hard to introduce Alyosha to Grushenka, whom he believes will shake Alyosha’s faith.
Pyotr Alexandrovich Miusov is a wealthy landowner, the cousin of Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov’s first wife, and briefly the guardian of the young Dmitri. Considering himself a political intellectual, Miusov utterly despises  Fyodor Pavlovich.
Pyotr Ilyich Perkhotin is a friend of Dmitri’s, a young official who snoops around after Dmitri on the night of Fyodor Pavlovich’s murder.
Kuzma Kuzmich Samsonov is the old merchant who brings Grushenka to the town after her former lover  betrays her.
Stinking Lizaveta is a young retarded girl who lives as the village idiot. She dies giving birth to Smerdyakov, leading most people to suspect that Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov either seduced or raped her.
Fetyukovich is a famous defense attorney from Moscow who represents Dmitri at the trial.
Ippolit Kirrillovich is the prosecuting attorney at Dmitri’s trial.
Father Ferapont is a severe and ascetic monk who hates Zosima.
Nikolai Ivanov Krasotkin is (Kolya) A bold, intelligent young boy who befriends Alyosha after Ilyusha becomes ill.
Ilyusha Snegiryov is (Ilyushechka, Ilyushka) The son of a military captain, who once saw his father beaten up by Dmitri. Proud and unwilling to be cowed by the larger boys who pick on him, Ilyusha befriends Alyosha, but becomes ill and dies toward the end of the novel.
Grigory Kutuzov Vasilievich is Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov’s servant, who, along with his wife Marfa, raises Smerdyakov from birth.