Alice is the seven-and-a-half-year-old protagonist of the story. Alice’s dream leads to her adventures in Looking-Glass World. Alice has set perceptions of the world and becomes frustrated when Looking-Glass World challenges those perceptions. Alice has good intentions, but has trouble befriending any of the creatures that populate Looking-Glass World.
Red Queen is a domineering, officious woman who brings Alice into the chess game. The Red Queen is civil but unpleasant, hounding Alice about her lack of etiquette and general knowledge.
White Queen is an untidy, disorderly mess of a woman. The White Queen explains the properties of Looking-Glass World, including the reversal of time and the need to believe in the impossible.
Red King is the sleeping King. Tweedledum and Tweedledee tell Alice that she is not real and exists only as part of the Red King’s dream.
The White King sends his horses and men after Humpty Dumpty after his fall. The White King takes words literally. He is completely helpless and is terrified of the Lion and the Unicorn.
White Knight is a kind and noble companion who rescues Alice from the Red Knight and leads her to the final square. The White Knight is old with shaggy hair, pale blue eyes, and a gentle face. He is an eccentric who has invented many bizarre contraptions.
Humpty Dumpty is a contemptuous, egg-like man based on the nursery rhyme character. Humpty Dumpty sits on a wall and treats Alice rudely. He explains the meaning of “Jabberwocky” to Alice but changes the meanings of words.
Tweedledum and Tweedledee is a pair of identical little fat men dressed as schoolboys. Tweedledum and Tweedledee get along well and finish each other’s thoughts, but wind up fighting each other over a broken rattle.
Unicorn is a mythical beast that resembles a horse with a long horn. The Unicorn battles the Lion. The Unicorn believes Alice to be a monster and tells Alice that he will believe in her if she agrees to believe in him.
The Lion does battle with the Unicorn in the town. The Lion’s actions imitate Alice’s nursery rhyme about the Lion and the Unicorn.
Haigha and Hatta is the White King’s messengers. Haigha is the March Hare and Hatta is the Mad Hatter fromAlice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Their madness is under control in this story.
The Sheep is an old shopkeeper. The Sheep is cranky and rude to Alice. The White Queen transforms into the Sheep.
The Gnat is Alice’s companion on the train and in the wood. The Gnat grows from normal insect size to become as large as a chicken. He points out potential puns and wordplay to Alice and always seems to be sad.
The Fawn is Alice’s companion through her travels through the wood, where she forgets the names of things. The Fawn is beautiful but runs away when it realizes that Alice is a human and might pose a threat.
The Red Knight is a knight who attempts to capture Alice. The Red Knight is captured by the White Knight.
The Tiger-lily is a talking flower. The Tiger-lily speaks civilly to Alice and has some authority over the other flowers.
The Rose is a talking flower that speaks rudely to Alice.
The Violet is a talking flower that also speaks rudely to Alice.
The Daisies is Talking flowers. The Daisies are extremely chatty and only quiet down when Alice threatens to pick them.
Lily is the White Queen’s daughter. Alice takes Lily’s place as the White Pawn in the chess game.
The Goat is a passenger on the train with Alice.
The man in white paper is a passenger on the train with Alice.
Frog is the old footman at Alice’s castle.