Wang Lung is the protagonist ofThe Good Earth.He begins life as a poor farmer and marries O-lan, a slave owned by the Hwang family. Wang Lung maintains a fierce attachment to the land. However, he is also extremely ambitious and envies the material success of the wealthy Hwangs. He is increasingly drawn to the Hwangs’ decadent lifestyle, and in the end, his piety and love of the land is only partially successful in helping him maintain his good character and moral standing.
O-lan is a woman sold to the wealthy Hwang family as a slave when she was ten years old. After she marries Wang Lung, she achieves a respectable position as the mother of three sons. She is a strong, hardworking, resourceful woman and a devoted wife. Still, she is continually marginalized by Wang Lung, and she is eventually replaced in his affections.
Wang Lung’s father is a traditional and morally severe man.
Wang Lung’s uncle is a cunning scoundrel and thief. Wang Lung’s uncle is the younger brother of Wang Lung’s father. Because the uncle is a member of the older generation, Wang Lung must show him respect and give him support in difficult times, despite his despicable nature. The uncle constantly exploits Wang Lung’s adherence to traditional Chinese codes of conduct.
The wife of Wang Lung’s uncle is a village gossip. Like her husband and son, she is lazy and manipulative.
The son of Wang Lung’s uncle is a wasteful, disrespectful scoundrel, and a sexual predator.
Lotus is a beautiful, delicate prostitute with bound feet.  Lotus becomes Wang Lung’s concubine. She has a terrible temper.
Extravagant, arrogant, and obsessed with appearances, Wang Lung’s first son grows up spoiled and rejects the values that made his father rich.
Crafty, enterprising, and miserly, Wang Lung’s second son is more responsible than the first son, but he also rejects his father’s traditional values as outmoded.
The wife of Wang Lung’s first son is the daughter of a local grain merchant, Liu. She grew up in a wealthy family, so she urges her husband to spend money on luxury items; she is spoiled and reckless. Like many women from wealthy families, she has bound feet.
The wife of Wang Lung’s second son is the daughter of a modest landowning village family. She becomes enemies with the wife of Wang Lung’s first son.
Wang Lung’s third son is the twin of Wang Lung’s second daughter. He dreams of glory and becomes a soldier against his father’s wishes.
Wang Lung’s first daughter is Suffers from severe malnutrition as an infant during a famine year. She is retarded and never learns to speak. Wang Lung develops a strong attachment to her and worries about what will become of her after his death.
Wang Lung’s second daughter is the twin of Wang Lung’s third son. After Wang Lung begins to criticize O-lan’s appearance cruelly, especially her big feet, O-lan decides to bind the little girl’s feet. Wang Lung promises her in marriage to Liu’s son.
Cuckoo is a slave who worked in the House of Hwang at the same time as O-lan. Cuckoo was beautiful in her youth, so the Old Master took her as his concubine while O-lan worked as a kitchen slave. Arrogant and bad-tempered, she insulted and berated O-lan constantly.
Ching is Wang Lung’s neighbor in the village and, later, Wang Lung’s capable, faithful, valued servant.
Pear Blossom is a slave purchased by Wang Lung during the famine years, when she was seven years old. She serves  as Lotus’s personal servant for years.
Liu is a grain merchant in town and a relative of Wang Lung’s by marriage.
Old Mistress Hwang is the opium-addicted matriarch of the great Hwang family.
Old Master Hwang is the patriarch of the great Hwang family when Wang Lung is a poor farmer. He spends money extravagantly and drains his coffers by taking a succession of concubines.