Tim Meeker is the narrator, he is fourteen at the beginning of the story. Tim greatly admires his older brother and longs to be more involved in the excitement and danger of the war.
Sam Meeker is Tim's older brother, he is sixteen at the beginning of the story. Sam is headstrong and often at odds with his father. A Yale student, he leaves school to fight the rebel cause and is ultimately framed as a cattle thief and shot publicly.
Eliphalet Meeker is Father to Sam and Tim, he is the owner of Meeker Tavern. Mr. Meeker wants nothing to do with the war and is angry at Sam for participating in it.
Susannah Meeker is Mother to Sam and Tim, she is very religious and hard working.
Betsy Read is Sam's girlfriend and the daughter of Colonel Read, a prominent local Patriot. Betsy is a bold, nosy teenaged girl, very loyal to Sam and to the Rebel cause, even though she, like all women, is forbidden to get involved.
Colonel Read is Betsy's father, he is a staunch and aging Patriot.
Tom Warrups is an Indian living on Colonel Read's land who allows Sam to hide out in his teepee.
Jerry Sanford is a young local boy and a friend of Tim's, he is captured by the British and dies on a prison ship.
Mr. Beach is an elderly, loyalist preacher.
Mr. Heron is a wealthy and somewhat shadowy local character, he claims to be a Tory but probably works for both sides. Heron asks Tim to relay a letter for him.
Benedict Arnold is He is captain of the Governor's Second Foot Guard, Sam's company.
General Putnam is the leader of the Rebels staying in Redding, he is a rigid and unemotional man who sentences Sam to death as an example to the rest of the troops.
Colonel Parsons is One of Sam's officers in Redding, he is slightly more sympathetic than General Putnam.
Mr. Platt is Tim and Sam's uncle in New Salem.
Ezekiel Platt is Sam and Tim's cousin in New Salem. Ezekial's family hosts Tim and his father when they travel to Verplancks Point.
Captain Betts is a local Patriot who is captured and then released by the British.
Captain Starr is a local Patriot who is killed by the British.
Ned is a local black man who is beheaded by the British.
Dr. Hobart is the Redding doctor.