Harry Potter is the hero and protagonist, Harry is a twelve-year-old boy with messy hair and glasses who became famous within the wizard community by surviving the curse of a powerful wizard. Harry frequently finds himself entangled in dangerous adventures but he always lives to tell the tale. Harry's character represents good intentions, innocence, and the fantasies of childhood.
Ron Weasley is Ron is tall, red-haired, and from a respected but poor family. Ron is one of Harry's two best friends at Hogwarts. He is loyal to Harry, and belligerent to their enemy, Malfoy. Ron uses experience and a process of trial-and-error to solve most mysteries. Ron's character is often overshadowed by Harry's, but Ron always manages to succeed.
Hermione Granger is Hermione is always the top student in her class. She is clever and well-read. Most spells come easily to her and remain in her encyclopedic mind. In this story especially, she throws her heart into fighting for causes, and she proves to be exceptionally loyal to Harry.
Once a student named Tom Riddle who attended Hogwarts fifty years before Harry, Voldemort became the most powerful dark wizard ever. When Harry was a baby, Voldemort killed Harry's parents and tried to kill Harry, only to have his curse backfire and render him powerless. He is an embodiment of pure evil. Through the help of Wormtail and a mysterious supporter at Hogwarts, Voldemort manages to rise again at the end of this story.
Tom Riddle is Voldemort's original name, and the name of his Muggle father.
Sirius Black is Harry's loyal and loving godfather, and an unregistered animagus who can change himself into a large black dog, Padfoot, at will. He is widely thought to be responsible for thirteen deaths that, in reality, Peter Pettigrew caused, and since his name is not yet clear, he must remain in hiding. He fulfills his godfatherly duties in this book, looking carefully after Harry.
The gamekeeper at Hogwarts and a good friend of Harry's, Hagrid is an enormous, caring, hairy man with an inimitable accent and a half-giant heritage. He has a great liking for strange and dangerous creatures, and in this book, he teaches Care of Magical Creatures.
Peter Pettigrew, or Wormtail is Wormtail betrays Lily and James Potter, turning their whereabouts over the Voldemort, then blowing up a dozen Muggles, framing Black and turning himself into a rat so that he could escape. He now resides with Voldemort and ultimately sacrifices his right hand to facilitate Voldemort's rebirth.
Albus Dumbledore is Dumbledore, the headmaster of Hogwarts, is a wise, powerful, elderly man with a long silver beard, and he is one of the most impressive characters Harry has ever met. He has a calm, secretive demeanor and is extremely intuitive, tolerant, and trustworthy, and he is the only wizard Voldemort has ever feared.
Mad-Eye Moody is a grizzled, eccentric, skilled retired Auror (dark-wizard catcher) who comes to teach Defense Against the Dark Arts at Hogwarts. He is deeply wary of anyone who could be a Dark wizard, and he drinks only from his hip flask. He takes a liking to Harry and subtly helps him with his tasks. In the end, he is really young Barty Crouch, disguised as Moody.
Ludo Bagman is the head of Magical Games and Sports within the Ministry of Magic; an ex- professional Quidditch player, and a rosy-faced, good-natured, irresponsible man, who once was a Death Eater, but without fully understanding his role.
Rita Skeeter is a nosey, middle-aged reporter who buzzes around, absorbing gossip to use in her reputation-ruining articles; Rita is an unregistered animagus beetle.
Bartemius Crouch is the stiff and rule-abiding Head of the Department for International Magical Cooperation; Percy Weasley's boss.
Bartemius Crouch, Jr. is Mr. Crouch's son, a convicted Death Eater who was allowed to remain outside of prison so long as he wore an Invisibility cloak and stayed in his father's house, guarded carefully by Winky. He escapes the confines of his father's house, returns to Voldemort, and comes to Hogwarts disguised as Moody.
Sibyll Trelawney is the Divination Professor; an insect-like, rather dramatic women who loves predicting deaths but is not at all accurate in her predictions.
Minerva McGonagall is the head of Gryffindor House, a stern but deeply concerned witch, and a great aficionado of Quidditch.
Severus Snape is the Potions teacher, and a slimy, ill-tempered man, Snape is the head of Slytherin House and gets great pleasure out of trying to get Harry into trouble. He once was a Death Eater, but now Dumbledore trusts him as one of the good wizards.
Karkaroff is the headmaster of Durmstrang School, and a shifty and suspicious man; he was once a Death Eater, and he flees at the end of this story.
Madame Maxime is the enormous and elegant headmistress of Beauxbatons, and the object of Hagrid's affection.
Fleur Delacour is the Triwizard champion for Beauxbatons, Fleur is a beautiful, silvery haired, part-Veela girl, who is a bit patronizing and snobby, but in the end grows moderately fond of Harry and Ron.
Viktor Krum is Krum is the eighteen-year-old Bulgarian Quidditch Seeker, a boy-wonder who attends Durmstrang and is chosen as their Triwizard champion. He is quiet and sullen, but he develops quite a crush on Hermione, and he turns out to be a nice, competent individual.
Cedric Diggory is the handsome, brave, and fair Hufflepuff Triwizard champion; dies at the hands of Lord Voldemort.
Cho Chang is a pretty fifth-year Ravenclaw girl on whom Harry develops a crush.
Neville Longbottom is a sweet, pudgy, and very clumsy boy who lives with Harry in Gryffindor. He lives with his grandmother because his parents, it turns out, were tortured and driven mad by Death Eaters.
Remus Lupin is Lupin is a werewolf and was last year's Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher.
Quirrell is the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher during Harry's first year at Hogwarts; he was possessed by Voldemort, and he ultimately died.
Draco Malfoy is a slimy, smirking, and snotty boy from Slytherin House, Malfoy is Harry's greatest Hogwarts nemesis (not counting Voldemort, who usually resides outside Hogwarts). Because his family is very wealthy and influential, Malfoy often tries to use his father's power as an intimidation tactic.
Lucius Malfoy is Draco Malfoy's father, a mean, powerful man whose name and money his son, Draco, uses to get his way.
Ginny Weasley is Ron's younger sister, and a sweet and shy red-haired girl with an enormous crush on Harry.
Percy Weasley is Ron's somewhat pompous older brother who currently works for the Ministry of Magic, under Mr. Crouch.
Fred Weasley is One of Ron's older brothers, Fred is a beater for the Gryffindor House Quidditch team, and a troublemaker when paired with his twin brother, George. Fred has the slightly louder, more over-the-top sense of humor of the two, but they are identical and usually inseparable. He and his brother George are currently involved in trying to set up a line of practical jokes called Weasleys' Wizard Wheezes.
George Weasley is One of Ron's older brothers, George is a beater for the Gryffindor House Quidditch team, and a troublemaker when paired with his twin brother, Fred. He is somewhat subtler and more tongue-in-cheek than his twin, but otherwise, for the most part identical. Together, the Weasley twins are an infamous, amusing, and charming pair.
Bill Weasley is Ron's second eldest brother, who was a prefect and Head Boy at Hogwarts, and who has a ponytail and an earring, and works in Gringotts Bank in Egypt.
Charlie Weasley is the eldest Weasley offspring who currently works with dragons in Romania, and who comes to Hogwarts to help with the first task.
Molly Weasley is Ron's mother; she is very maternal and protective, but also quite strict.
Arthur Weasley is Ron's father, who works in the Misuse of Muggles Artifacts Office within the Ministry of Magic. He loves any sort of Muggle things with a buoyant, childlike enthusiasm. A thoroughly likeable man, Mr. Weasley treats Harry as if he were one of his own (many) children.
Winky is Once Mr. Crouch's house-elf, and now a free elf working at Hogwarts, she is a squeaky, hysterical, unconfident figure.
Once the Malfoys' house-elf, Dobby was freed by Harry several years ago, and now is working at Hogwarts and feeling quite liberated with his new freedom. He is very loyal to Harry.
Vernon Dursley is Harry's stuffy, nasty-tempered Muggle uncle.
Petunia Dursley is Harry's unpleasant Muggle aunt.
Dudley Dursley is Harry's spoiled, overweight Muggle cousin.
Frank Bryce is the Riddles' gardener, and an elderly, misanthropic Muggle suspected to have murdered the Riddles; Frank is murdered by Voldemort in the first chapter of the book.
Bertha Jorkins is a middle-aged, gossipy witch who works for the Ministry of Magic. She is tapped for information and killed by Voldemort.
Amos Diggory is the proud father of Cedric, and another worker for the Ministry of Magic.
Lily Potter is Harry's mother who sacrificed herself to save Harry from Voldemort; she and James Potter return as ghosts to protect Harry from Voldemort at the end.
James Potter is Harry's father, also killed by Voldemort.
Argus Filch is the Hogwarts caretaker, who is grouchy and adores nothing but his cat.
Cornelius Fudge is the rather eccentrically dressed Minister of Magic, very kind to Harry, but ultimately somewhat of a stubborn and cowardly man, when he refuses to acknowledge Voldemort's return.
Seamus Finnigan is One of Harry's Gryffindor roommates
Dean Thomas is Another of Harry's Gryffindor roommates.
Parvati Patil is a pretty but rather vain and annoying Gryffindor girl who goes to the Yule Ball with Harry.
Colin Creevey is a third-year Gryffindor boy who idolizes Harry.
Goyle is One of Draco Malfoy's unintelligent, lumbering cronies.
Crabbe is the other of Draco Malfoy's unintelligent, lumbering cronies.
Nearly-Headless Nick is a friendly Gryffindor ghost.
Peeves is a poltergeist who causes lots of harmless trouble at Hogwarts.
Moaning Myrtle is a glum Hogwarts ghost who has somewhat of a crush on Harry.
Mr. Roberts is a confused Muggle who owns the site where the Weasleys camp during the Quidditch World Cup.
Hedwig is Harry's snowy, loyal owl.
Pigwidgeon is Ron's tiny, excitable pet owl.
Crookshanks is Hermione's aggressive ginger cat.
Padfoot is Sirius Black's animagi name, when he is a large black dog.
Fawkes is Dumbledore's beautiful pet phoenix, who gave a two feathers that ended up in the wands of Harry and Voldemort.